# Querying a Relational DB

Due: Mon Oct 11

In this assignment, we will get a little hands on experience with building some
of the parts for querying a relational database.  You will implement the three
join algorithms discussed in class (as well as other additional tools for
supporting those algorithms), develop a cost model for a very limited
set of queries, and assess that model.

The deliverables will be your code and a brief writeup (about 5 pages)
describing the cost model that you developed and an assessment of how well the
cost model does in estimating the cost of evaluating queries.  Make sure to
discuss the implementation decisions that you made and how those effect the cost
model (as well as any other assumption that you have with respect to your
computers hardware architecture).

While you are welcome to build up your system however you wish, I personally,
would take the following steps:

0. Decide on a very simple schema for a few tables that allows you to make some
   interesting natural join queries.  Generate some data sets of various sizes
   that allows you to develop quickly, but also run some tests on larger
   datasets.

0. start working on some tools for estimating the cost of query.  While you
   don't need to have developed the final model, getting started early will
   allow you to build up the model as you develop other pieces of the system

0. start working on some tools for assessing the accuracy of your model.  While
   you don't need to have your experiments developed, getting started early will
   allow you to see how well your model is doing as you develop other pieces of
   the system.

0. write a set of tools for reading and writing blocks to and from disk.  It
   would be helpful if you think about this code being general enough to allow
   you to read blocks from an indexing data structure and a relation.

0. implement a linear scans that does not use an index

0. add the linear scan to your model and assess how accurate the model is.

0. write this up (in rough draft form)

0. implement an indexing data structure that supports reading (but doesn't have
   to support updates)

0. implement a scan that does uses the index (add it to your model, and
   update your assessment, and write up in rough draft form)

0. implement three join algorithms (after each, add it to your model and update
   your assessment, and write up in rough draft form).

0. you now have a huge set of tools, do something super cool!  A few ways to
   help you get started.... How often can your system take a new query or be run
   over a new dataset, propose an evaluation strategy and be right?  When it is
   wrong, why is it wrong?  If you had to build more, what would you pick and
   why?  Add your findings to your report.

0. polish writeup.

## Notes

You can use whatever language you choose.  If you would like to use external
libraries, please check with me.  In many cases, it will be fine provided that
the library doesn't replace one of the major steps above.  So, for example, feel
free to use a logging library but it would not be appropriate to use a B+ tree
library.

You can work in groups of up to 3 people (I would suggest working in groups of 2
though. Coordinating such a small project with 3 people will likely just create
a lot of blockers.)

## Assessment

You must supply some automated testing for each of the major graded components
of the system:

* 20 misc tooling
* 10 index
* 15 scans
* 15 joins (10 per join algo)
* 15 cost model
* 25 write up

## How to submit (TBA):

**Deliverable 1** In a git repository on Github, create a tag called `hw01`.
Push your code (and tag), and add me to your repository (my username is `dlm`).

**Deliverable 2** On D2L, submit a PDF of your writeup (make sure in the writeup
to include the url of your repo

