# HBase Assignment

This assignment is intended to give you a little more hands on experience with
HBase. You will also get practice designing a data model and arguing why the
model appropriate. You will have the opportunity to propose an interesting
question, express why that question is interesting, implement a solution, and
communicate how to use your solution.  You may work with others, use the same
data set, or even ask the same question. However, you are expected to do your
own write-ups. Note that it is fine (even encouraged) to have others read your
writeup and provide feedback.

## Part 1

We will create a database of nutritional facts. Follow the steps in Seven DB in
seven weeks for HBase Day 2 (e.g. notes on Column store), "Do" question 1 and 2.
Note that the question "What should we use for the row key?" is not that useful
if we do not know the questions that we will ask. Propose a query and a schema
for efficiently answering the query. Explain why the schema is a good
choice. Next you will write three jruby scripts. First, `create.rb` to
create your database. Second, `load.rb` to load data into the database.
Third `query.rb` that queries your database.

It looks like the link in the book for the `myfoodapediadata.zip` file is out of
date.  You can find it on
[data.gov](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/mypyramid-food-raw-data)

**To submit**
For part 1, create a folder called `part1` containing three ruby files
`create.rb`, `load.rb`, `query.rb`, and one pdf file called `writeup.pdf`
stating your question and explaining your design choices.

## Part 2

You will have to come up with a question that uses the nutritional facts and an
additional dataset. A good starting point for finding an additional data set is
[data catalog](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset). Select a data set.  Using the
nutritional facts and your data set, create a table that answers your question
without needing to scan the entire data set (but maybe uses ranges).  You may
need to write some additional code to pre-process your data before data entry.
(If you need to write some pre-processing code, it is ok if it is not the most
efficient code in the world.  But it should work over your data set on your
computer.)

**To submit**

For part 2, create folder called "part2" containing three ruby files files
`create.rb`, `load.rb`, `query.rb`, for creating, loading and querying,
respectively. It should also contain a pdf file called `writeup.pdf`. If you
created any additional codes for preprocessing the data, please include them in
the folder `part2/preprocess`. The writeup should state your question and
explain your design choices. It should provide a minimum of 2 sentences
explaining WHY the question you are answering is interesting. In addition, the
writeup should provide instructions for how to use what you have prepared. Do
NOT include the data files, however, your writeup should provide a link or
explanation for how one can acquire the data.

## How to submit

In a git repository on Github, create a tag called `hw02`.
Push your code, writeups, and tag, and add me to your repository (my username is
`dlm`).

On d2l, in the textbox provide a link to the repository.
