# Load the data

[Download the data](./03.zip) or update the repo.  Unzip the file and place it
somewhere that is accessible to your mongo container. For example if you are
running from the root of the repo

    $ unzip hw/03.zip -d env/mongo/mnt/

Start bash in the client docker container

    $ docker run --net=host -v ${PWD}/env/mongo/mnt:/mnt/ -it adv-db/clients bash

Once in the container, you can check that the directory is mapped by check that
`restaurants.json` is in `/mnt` with

    root@docker-desktop:/# ls /mnt
    restaurants.json

In the container, use `mongoimport` to import data:

    cd /mnt/
    mongoimport --db my-advdb-database --collection resturants --file restaurants.json

Next start the mongo shell

    mongo my-advdb-database

And check out some of the data

    > JSON.stringify(db.resturants.findOne(), null, 4)
    {
        "_id": { "$oid": "6171872d258fd1c45672362d" },
        "address": {
            "building": "469",
            "coord": [ -73.961704, 40.662942 ],
            "street": "Flatbush Avenue",
            "zipcode": "11225"
        },
        "borough": "Brooklyn",
        "cuisine": "Hamburgers",
        "grades": [
            { "date": "2014-12-30T00:00:00.000Z", "grade": "A", "score": 8 },
            { "date": "2014-07-01T00:00:00.000Z", "grade": "B", "score": 23 },
            { "date": "2013-04-30T00:00:00.000Z", "grade": "A", "score": 12 },
            { "date": "2012-05-08T00:00:00.000Z", "grade": "A", "score": 12 }
        ],
        "name": "Wendy'S",
        "restaurant_id": "30112340"
    }

# Run the queries

Now, lets start working on some queries.  Note that some of the later questions
use aggregation.  You can find more on aggregating from the mongo docs (or if
you like 7DBs way of explaining, check out Mongo-Day 2's section "Aggregated
Queries":

1. Write a MongoDB query to display the fields restaurant\_id, name, borough and
   cuisine for all the documents in the collection restaurant.

1. Write a MongoDB query to display the fields restaurant\_id, name, borough and
   cuisine, but exclude the field \_id for all the documents in the collection
   restaurant.

1. Write a MongoDB query to display all the restaurant which is in the borough
   Bronx.

1. Write a MongoDB query to display the next 5 restaurants after skipping first
   5 which are in the borough Bronx (Hint: often this technique is called
   paging)

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants who achieved a score more than
   90.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants that achieved a score, more
   than 80 but less than 100 Hint: check out [$elemMatch over an "Array of
   Embeded Documents"
   array](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/elemMatch/#array-of-embedded-documents)

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants that do not prepare any cuisine
   of 'American' and their grade score more than 70 and latitude less than
   -65.754168.  You MUST use $and operator

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants which do not prepare any
   cuisine of 'American' and achieved a score more than 70 and located in the
   latitude less than -65.754168. Do NOT use $and operator

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants which do not prepare any
   cuisine of 'American ' and achieved a grade point 'A' not belongs to the
   borough Brooklyn. The document must be displayed according to the cuisine in
   descending order

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which contain 'Wil' as first 3 letters for its name.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which contain 'ces' as last three letters for its name.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which contain 'Reg' as 3 letters somewhere in its name.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurants which belong to the borough
   Bronx and prepared either American or Chinese dish.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which belong to the borough Staten Island or Queens or
   Bronx or Brooklyn.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which are not belonging to the borough Staten Island or
   Queens or Bronx or Brooklyn.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants which achieved a score which is not more than ten.
   NOTE: you can answer as less than or equal, but writing try writing as
   "not-ing" "greater than 10" to get the feeling of nesting operators.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, borough and cuisine
   for those restaurants whose name begins with 'Wil' or prepared dish except
   'American' and 'Chinese'.  Sort descending by name.

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name, and grades for those
   restaurants which achieved a grade of "A" and scored 11 on an ISODate
   "2014-08-11T00:00:00Z".

1. Write a MongoDB query to find the restaurant Id, name and grades for those
   restaurants where the 2nd element of grades array contains a grade of "A" and
   score 9 on an ISODate "2014-08-11T00:00:00Z".

1. Write a MongoDB query to arrange the just the names (no ids) of the
   restaurants in ascending order.

1. Write a MongoDB query to arranged the name of the cuisine in ascending order
   and for that same cuisine borough should be in descending order. Output name
   and borough.

1. Write a MongoDB query to know whether all the addresses contains the street
   or not.

1. Write a MongoDB query which will count the number of documents in the
   restaurants collection where the coord field value is Double.

1. Write a MongoDB query that counts the number of restaurants that have a score
   of 0 mod 7.  (E.g. 0, 7, 14, 21...)

1. Write a MongoDB query that gives the average score and output documents with
   the format `{ name: "xyz", borough: "abc", avgScore: x.y }`

1. Write a Mongo query that counts the number of restaurants with an "A" rating
   in Brooklyn.

1. Write a Mongo query that counts the number of restaurants with an "A" rating
   in each borough.  (You must use one query, not run the previous query once
   for each borough.)

1. Write a Mongo query that displays the average score by cuisine type.



# What to submit

In a file query.js write your queries where the question is a comment and your
query is in code. For example:


    // 1. Write a MongoDB query to display the fields restaurant\_id, name, borough and
    //   cuisine for all the documents in the collection restaurant.
    db.resturants.find(
      { ... } },
      { ... }
    )

    //2. Write a MongoDB query to display the fields restaurant\_id, name, borough and
    //   cuisine, but exclude the field \_id for all the documents in the collection
    //   restaurant.
    db.resturants.find(
      { ... } },
      { ... }
    )

    ...

Upload the file to D2L.
