# Neo4J

In this assignment, we will play with graph databases and airport data.

## Load the data

Last time I tried this assignment, some had trouble loading the data.  So, I
will give you a few ways to load the data. We will use the data set from [neo4j
site](https://neo4j.com/graphgist/flight-analyzer)


### Way 1: Use DB that I setup

Copy and paste is the easiest way, but it crashes a lot of computers.  But, give
it a try!

Download and unzip the [flights file](./flights.cypher.tgz).  Open the file in
your favorite text editor. Copy and paste the create command into your browser
(as we did in class).  Wait a little bit for it to paste and run the command.

Hopefully that worked!

### Way 2: Use DB that I setup

This is a little more work, but you will learn a bit about how neo4j handles
files.  **Warning** You must do this when Neo4J is NOT running.

Download the [flights database](./flights.db.tgz) and put it in the correct
place:

    tar xvzf flights.db.tgz
    mv flights.db <Root of Course Repo>/env/neo4j/data/databases
    cd <Root of Course Repo>/env/neo4j/data/databases
    mv graph.db graph.db.bak
    mv flights.db graph.db

Start Neo4J

    cd env/neo4j
    docker run \
        -p 7474:7474 -p 7687:7687 \
        -v ${PWD}/data:/data \
        -e NEO4J_AUTH=none adv-db/neo4j

If all goes well, you should be good to go.

## Answer queries

For the assignment, feel free to work in the browser, the shell, or via REST (or
try them all).  You will provide queries for the following:

1. Write a query that will list all the airports in the graph.
1. Write a query that will report the number of airports in the graph.
1. Bozeman's airport code is "BZN". Write a query that tells you if Bozeman is
   in the list. Do not manually look through the list in the previous problem.
1. Write a query that reports if Helena in the list.
1. For the previous two questions, try to write your query for Helena and
   Bozeman so that the only change to the query is the airport code.  (For
   reference Bozeman is in the data set and Helena is not (because Bozeman
   rocks!)
1. When I wrote this assignment, I was on a very long flight to Washington
   Dulles (airport code IAD).  According to our data set, what is the shortest
   path that I could have gone (in terms of number of hops)?  (Do not worry
   about origin and destination.)
1. I used to live in NYC (near Laguardia Airport), how many flight options would
   I have from Laguardia (LGA) to Dulles (IAD). (*Hint* check out
   `allShortestPaths`.)
1. For each airpoort *a*, get the average ticket cost of flying to *a*.

## Submission

Put all your queries in a file called `queries.cypher` put all content for
submission in a folder `neo4j-lab`. Tar and gzip the folder (eg `tar cvzf
neo4j-lab.tgz neo4j-lab`) and submit on D2L.
