# MongoDB

This lecture is adapted from 7DB-mongo-day2

## More advanced querying

Let's add some additional data in a new collection

    db.countries.insert([
        {
            _id : "us",
            name : "United States",
            exports : {
                foods : [
                    { name : "bacon", tasty : true },
                    { name : "burgers" }
                ]
            }
        }, {
            _id : "ca",
            name : "Canada",
            exports : {
                foods : [
                    { name : "bacon", tasty : false },
                    { name : "syrup", tasty : true }
                ]
            }
        }, {
            _id : "mx",
            name : "Mexico",
            exports : {
                foods : [
                    { name : "salsa", tasty : true, condiment : true }
                ]
            }
        }
    ])

And check that the insert went okay:

    > db.countries.count()
    3

**Question** Write a query that prints out the name of the countries that
exports bacon that is also tasty


Let's build it up...

First, just get the name:

    db.countries.find(
        { },
        { _id: 0, name:1 }
    )

Now, lets get the name of the countries that export bacon

    db.countries.find(
        { 'exports.foods.name': 'bacon'},
        { _id: 0, name:1 }
    )

And that is tasty:

    db.countries.find(
        { 'exports.foods.name': 'bacon', 'exports.foods.tasty': true },
        { _id: 0, name:1 }
    )

But that is not right observe:

    > db.countries.find(
        { '_id': { $in: ['us', 'ca'] } },
        { 'exports.foods': 1 }
    )
    { "_id" : "ca", "exports" : { "foods" : [ { "name" : "bacon", "tasty" : false }, { "name" : "syrup", "tasty" : true } ] } }
    { "_id" : "us", "exports" : { "foods" : [ { "name" : "bacon", "tasty" : true }, { "name" : "burgers" } ] } }

So Canada was in the output because the syrup is tasty.  We can use a query
function called `$elemMatch` to match all criterion.  Let's update our query:

    > db.countries.find( {
        'exports.foods' : {
            $elemMatch : {
                name : 'bacon',
                tasty : true
            }
        }
    }, {

        _id : 0,
        name : 1
    })
    { "name" : "United States" }

Which gives us what we wanted.  We also can use boolean operations like `$or`
that finds all counties with `_id` "mx" OR `name` "United States:

    db.countries.find({
        $or : [
            { _id : "mx" },
            { name : "United States" }
        ]
    }, {
        _id:1
    })

Again, check out more at [db.collection.find](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.collection.find/)


**Note** The example below is illustrative, there are better ways to perform
this query (see population range query above).  The last idea we will see today
is that **if** there are **no** methods to supporting a query that we wish to
run, we can run a predicate over all documents and only return documents for
which the predicate is true.  For example, if we wanted to find all towns for
which the population is between 6k and 60k, an alternative is the following:

    db.towns.find(function() {
        return 6000 < this.populations && this.population < 60000;
    })

**Warning** Using functions is a good way to test things out but can be kind of
slow to execute and error prone.  In general it is suggested to use the standard
query tools when possible.  However, in my opinion, if you know javascript,
writing functions is way easier for exploratory data analysis.

