# MongoDB

This lecture is adapted from 7DB-mongo-day1

## Env Setup

See [mongo env setup instructions](../env/mongo/README.md)

Startup the mongo server

    $ docker run --net=host -p 27017:27017 adv-db/mongo

Cd over to `${ROOT}/env/mongo/mnt/` and run

    $ docker run --net=host -v $(pwd):/mnt/ -it adv-db/clients mongo my-advdb-database

Make sure that all is working.  In the client, run

    > db.test.insert({hello: "world"})
    WriteResult({ "nInserted" : 1 })
    > show collections
    test
    > db.test.find()
    { "_id" : ObjectId("5d7f874728a91b96ee759a66"), "hello" : "world" }

Great! Lets get started.

The first thing that we will need is some terminology.  We are currently working
in the `my-advdb-database` and within a database, we have *collections* and
within collections, we have *documents*.  Each document is BSON (but we can
think of them as JSON).

Notice that we didn't have to do anything to create the  collections, we didn't
even have to setup any schema to insert a document.  In fact, we could insert
another document into test with a different structure

    db.test.insert({goodbye: "world"})

    > db.test.find()
    { "_id" : ObjectId("5d7f874728a91b96ee759a66"), "hello" : "world" }
    { "_id" : ObjectId("5d7f887828a91b96ee759a67"), "goodbye" : "world" }

## Object ID Structure & JSON (if needed)

**TODO** add paper notes after class

## CRUD operations

In this section, we explore the basic CRUD operations.

### Create

Let's start off and add some data

    db.towns.insert({
        name: "New York",
        population: 22200000,
        lastCensus: ISODate("2016-07-01"),
        famousFor: [ "the MOMA", "food", "Derek Jeter" ],
        mayor : {
            name : "Bill de Blasio",
            party : "D"
            }
    })

And let's see how the collections updated

    > show collections
    test
    towns

Notice that now we have a second collection `towns`.

**WARNING** Notice that the book states that one cannot do server side joins
however mongo fetches the document and all nested content.  However, this
statement is no longer true.  Around late 2015, mongo added `$lookup` to add
support for server side joins. See [mongo blog for more
info](https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/joins-and-other-aggregation-enhancements-coming-in-mongodb-3-2-part-1-of-3-introduction).

When working with the mongo shell, we are using a flavor of javascript. So,
let's make our lives a little easier and create a function to help us insert.
On your host machine, fire up a text editor and the `mnt` folder of our host
machine, create a file called `insertCity.js`

    function insertCity(
      name, population, lastCensus, famousFor, mayorInfo
    ){
      db.towns.insert({
        name: name,
        population: population,
        lastCensus: ISODate(lastCensus),
        famousFor: famousFor,
        mayor : mayorInfo
      });
    }

And, we can load it in our client container

    > load('/mnt/insertCity.js')
    > insertCity
    function insertCity(
      name, population, lastCensus, famousFor, mayorInfo
    ){
      db.towns.insert({
        name: name,
        population: population,
        lastCensus: ISODate(lastCensus),
        famousFor: famousFor,
        mayor : mayorInfo
      });
    }

Now, we can add using our `insertCity` function

    > insertCity("Punxsutawney", 6200, '2016-01-31',
        ["Punxsutawney Phil"], { name : "Richard Alexander" }
    )
    > insertCity("Portland", 582000, '2016-09-20',
        ["beer", "food", "Portlandia"], { name : "Ted Wheeler", party : "D" }
    )


### Read

Let's explore querying a little further.  We can search by various properties of
the document.  For example, by `_id`

    > db.towns.find({ "_id": ObjectId("5d7f8a2b28a91b96ee759a68") })
    { "_id" : ObjectId("5d7f8a2b28a91b96ee759a68"), ...}

Similar to projection in the relational model, we can filter to only get the
properties that are relevant.

    db.towns.find(
        { "_id": ObjectId("5d7f8a2b28a91b96ee759a68") },
        { name: 1 }
    )

Or, without the id

    db.towns.find(
        { "_id": ObjectId("5d7f8a2b28a91b96ee759a68") },
        { _id: 0, name: 1 }
    )

Or everything but name the name

    db.towns.find(
        { "_id": ObjectId("5d7f8a2b28a91b96ee759a68") },
        { name: 0 }
    )

In fact, Mongo defines a pretty sophisticated query language that takes
advantage of the javascript based shell.  For example, if we wanted to find all
the towns that begin with "P" with a population range between 10000-1000000 we
could create a constant

    const population_range = {
        $lt: 1000000,
        $gt: 10000
    }

And then use the constant in the query

    db.towns.find(
        { name : /^P/, population : population_range },
        { _id: 0, name: 1 }
    )

You can explore more about finding at
[db.collection.find](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.collection.find/)

### Update

Updating is really easy with Mongo, we just need to find the thing we want and
update.  For example if we wanted to update the town of Portland to have a
state, we can get the object id

    > db.towns.find({name: "Portland"}, {id:1})
    { "_id" : ObjectId("5d7f8ed01241ab9242f405fb") }

And update using the `update` command and `$set`

    db.towns.update(
        { _id: ObjectId( "5d7f8ed01241ab9242f405fb" ) },
        { $set : { "state" : "OR" } }
    );

Also included are functions to update at the DB.  For example increment the
population by 1k.

    db.towns.update(
        { _id: ObjectId( "5d7f8ed01241ab9242f405fb" ) },
        { $inc : { population : 1000} }
    )

You can explore more about updating at
[db.collection.update](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.collection.update/)

### Deleting

Removing a collection is easy, just hand a query to `db.collection.remove`.  For
example, to remove all all towns with a name that starts with "P" and a
population range between 10k and 1 million,

    # see what we are going to remove
    > db.towns.find(
        { name : /^P/, population : { $lt: 1000000, $gt: 10000 } }
    )
    { _id ...}

    # count the current number of towns
    > db.towns.count()
    4

    # remove
    > db.towns.remove(
        { name : /^P/, population : { $lt: 1000000, $gt: 10000 } }
    )
    WriteResult({ "nRemoved" : 1 })

    # count again
    > db.towns.count()
    3
