# Redis

Notes are based of 7DB - Redis - Day 1

Redis was first released around 2009 and was intended to be a fast "data
structures" server.  For example, it is great to use within a system as a cache
storage or as a queue.


## Setup

Follow the [setup instructions](../env/redis/README.md)


## CRUD operations

Let's say that you wanted to build a URL shortening service.  Let's explore how
a DB like Redis can help us in the process.

Like other DBs, we will start off with CRUD operations.  Setting is very easy,
just `SET <key> <value>`

    set msu http://montana.edu

And getting is easy as well

    get msu

We can also set multiple

    mset um http://www.umt.edu goog http://www.google.com

And get multiple

    mget msu um goog

## Complex data types

Next we explore some of the data types in Redis.  They are the building blocks
for many systems.  First, our system will need some users

## Hash

Let's assume that we wanted to store users with a name a password (**NOTE**
Never store passwords in clear text, this is only for an illustration).  So far
we could get fancy with our keys

    mset user:dave:name "David Millman" user:dave:password "12345"
    mget user:dave:name user:dave:password

But, this is a "data structure" DB, we can do better.  In fact, we have a hash
type that allows us to store this more naturally.

    hmset user:dave name "David Millman" password "12345"
    hvals user:dave

Or get the keys

    hkeys user:dave

Or one value

    hget user:dave password

However, you can only go one level deep on a hash.  Redis is very fast to use in
a system, but the speed does come at the cost of a simpler data model.

## Lists

What if we wanted to build a feature that allowed uses to queue up pages that
they want to look at.  Since a queue is just a list with FIFO semantics it is
easy:

    rpush dave:wishlist msu goog um

We can get the length of the list

    llen dave:wishlist

Or a sublist over a range of indices

    lrange dave:wishlist 1 2

Note that the last element is inclusive and we can all to the end with -1

    lrange dave:wishlist 1 -1

(We can remove intermediate elements with `LREM`, see docs for more info.)  If
we are going to build a queue, since we pushed from the right, we need to be
able to pop from the left:

    lpop dave:wishlist

**Question** How would you update so that we process the wishlist as a stack?

What about moving content from one list to another?  We can use the command
`RPOPLPUSH` for example:

    rpoplpush dave:wishlist dave:visited

Note that `RPOPLPUSH` is the only command that moves from one list to anther
(since this has to be done atomically), so if you need to move data between
lists, you will need to plan your data structures accordingly.

### Message queue

I think that I have used Redis in some form in almost every big project that I
have created over the past 7 years.  In part because it is really easy to create
a message queue.  Let's see an example.  In a second terminal start a second
client

    docker run --net=host -v ${PWD}/env/redis/mnt:/mnt/ -it adv-db/clients redis-cli

In the first client block on a list that waits for comments to post for 300
seconds

    BRPOP comments 300

Now, hop back to the first client and post a comment

    LPUSH comments "This is super cool!"

Notice that the second client stopped waiting and outputted the comments and if
we check out the contents of comments, our comment was popped. There are
a few other various, see other `BR*` commands for options.

## Sets

No collection of data structures would be complete without sets.  To illustrate,
let's add tags to our sites:

    sadd edu cs.montana.edu umt.edu nyu.edu unc.edu
    sadd cs cs.montana.edu google.com acm.org

But sets are only really useful if we can perform set operations like
intersection

    sinter edu cs

Or difference

    sdiff edu cs

Or Union

    sunion edu cs


## Sorted Sets

Sorted sets are a little slower to work with over hashes (since operations take
time proportional to the log of the size of the set instead of const).  Sorted
operations are prefixed with `Z`.  Let's created a sorted list of visits per
shorted url:


    zadd visits 10 um 100 msu 50 goog

We can retrieve by range

    zrange 1 2

And change scores with `ZINCRBY`

    zincrby visits 10 msu

## Expiry

One of my favorite uses for Redis is a cache, but as with all good caching
systems, you must have someway to determine if data is no longer valid.  Time is
a great option, which can be accomplished with `EXPIRY` for example

    set ice "I'm melting...."
    expire ice 10

And now lets check

    > exists ice
    (integer) 1
    > exists ice
    (integer) 0

In fact, we can set and expire as a 1 liner

    setex ice 10 "I'm melting...."
    exists ice
    ...

And we can check the TTL

    setex ice 10 "I'm melting...."
    ttl ice
    ...
    ttl ice

## Transactions

A common operation in a system is incrementing a counter.  Often, one is tempted
to do the following:

    set my-counter 0
    get my-counter
    ... proccessing ...
    ... update counter
    set my-counter 1

**Question** If there are multiple users, what is the problem?

So, if all you are doing is incrementing, redis has an increment function to
make this easier:

    incr my-counter

In fact we can control the amount of the increment

    incrby my-counter 10

But what if you want to do a bunch of commands together?  Transactions would be helpful!

    127.0.0.1:6379> multi
    OK
    127.0.0.1:6379> set dave http://millman.us
    QUEUED
    127.0.0.1:6379> incr my-counter
    QUEUED
    127.0.0.1:6379> exec
    1) OK
    2) (integer) 13

**Question** What happens if you miss type a command and have an error while in
a transaction?

Note that transactions in Redis are different than we have seen in other DBs.
Each command is queued and then run as a batch.   So if I run


    127.0.0.1:6379> multi
    127.0.0.1:6379> set a 1
    127.0.0.1:6379> set b 2
    127.0.0.1:6379> set c 3
    127.0.0.1:6379> discard

None of the previous commands will have run


## Clean up

You can use the commands `FLUSHDB` and `FLUSHALL` to remove all keys from the
current db and all dbs. (Note that we didn't cover here, but you can change to
different DBs with `SELECT`).

## Try at home
**Question** How would you implement symmetric difference?  (e.g. Union \ Intersection)

We will need to make some temp sets (look at `SUNIONSTORE` and `SINTERSTORE`)





