# Redis

Notes are based of 7DB - Redis - Day 1 & 2

## Setup

Follow the [setup instructions](../env/redis/README.md)

## Sets

No collection of data structures would be complete without sets.  To illustrate,
let's add tags to our sites:

    sadd edu cs.montana.edu umt.edu nyu.edu unc.edu
    sadd cs cs.montana.edu google.com acm.org

But sets are only really useful if we can perform set operations like
intersection

    sinter edu cs

Or difference

    sdiff edu cs

Or Union

    sunion edu cs


## Sorted Sets

Sorted sets are a little slower to work with over hashes (since operations take
time proportional to the log of the size of the set instead of const).  Sorted
operations are prefixed with `Z`.  Let's created a sorted list of visits per
shorted url:


    zadd visits 10 um 100 msu 50 goog

We can retrieve by range

    zrange 1 2

And change scores with `ZINCRBY`

    zincrby visits 10 msu

## Expiry

One of my favorite uses for Redis is a cache, but as with all good caching
systems, you must have someway to determine if data is no longer valid.  Time is
a great option, which can be accomplished with `EXPIRY` for example

    set ice "I'm melting...."
    expire ice 10

And now lets check

    > exists ice
    (integer) 1
    > exists ice
    (integer) 0

In fact, we can set and expire as a 1 liner

    setex ice 10 "I'm melting...."
    exists ice
    ...

And we can check the TTL

    setex ice 10 "I'm melting...."
    ttl ice
    ...
    ttl ice

## Transactions

A common operation in a system is incrementing a counter.  Often, one is tempted
to do the following:

    set my-counter 0
    get my-counter
    ... proccessing ...
    ... update counter
    set my-counter 1

**Question** If there are multiple users, what is the problem?

So, if all you are doing is incrementing, redis has an increment function to
make this easier:

    incr my-counter

In fact we can control the amount of the increment

    incrby my-counter 10

But what if you want to do a bunch of commands together?  Transactions would be helpful!

    127.0.0.1:6379> multi
    OK
    127.0.0.1:6379> set dave http://millman.us
    QUEUED
    127.0.0.1:6379> incr my-counter
    QUEUED
    127.0.0.1:6379> exec
    1) OK
    2) (integer) 13

**Question** What happens if you miss type a command and have an error while in
a transaction?

Note that transactions in Redis are different than we have seen in other DBs.
Each command is queued and then run as a batch.   So if I run


    127.0.0.1:6379> multi
    127.0.0.1:6379> set a 1
    127.0.0.1:6379> set b 2
    127.0.0.1:6379> set c 3
    127.0.0.1:6379> discard

None of the previous commands will have run


## Clean up

You can use the commands `FLUSHDB` and `FLUSHALL` to remove all keys from the
current db and all dbs. (Note that we didn't cover here, but you can change to
different DBs with `SELECT`).

## Quiz

Write Redis commands (or a sequence of commands) for the following:

1. Creates two sets `A` and `B` such that `A \intersect B` is non-empty

2. In a transaction, implement symmetric difference.  **Hint** You will need to
   make some temp sets (look at `SUNIONSTORE` and `SINTERSTORE`).  You must
   cleanup any temporary data that you create.







