# Hbase

Lecture material adapted from 7DB-HBase-day2

## Running Scripts

Like last time, we will get our systems running. Make sure you are in `env/hbase`.  We will use the commands that I prepared that are in
`env/hbase/bin` to work with a standalone version of Hbase.

Start hbase by running

    ./bin/hbase-start


And we will start a hbase shell with

    ./bin/hbase-shell

## Getting going

The first thing that we are going to do is create a table, called `wiki`, with
one column family called `text`

    create 'wiki', 'text'

## Building a wiki

Let's use everything that we have learned to do something a little more
interesting.  Lets create a wiki with the following requirements:

1. page title is unique
2. page can have multiple revisions
3. each revision is identified by a timestamp
4. each revision contains text
5. each revision has an author
6. each revision contains optional commit comment

The requirements naturally break down as follows:

- title is key
- two column families:
    - text with default column `""`
    - revision with columns `author` and `comment`

Let's update the schema. As before, we will use the `alter` command to add the
revision column family.

    disable 'wiki'
    alter 'wiki', { NAME => 'revision', VERSIONS => org.apache.hadoop.hbase.HConstants::ALL_VERSIONS }
    enable 'wiki'

Note that we do not specify the columns, it is up the application layer to
maintain the schema.

Great, now, let's make some edits:

    put 'wiki', 'Page1', 'text:', 'This is page 1a!'
    put 'wiki', 'Page1', 'revision:author', 'Dave M'
    put 'wiki', 'Page1', 'revision:commit', 'First edit from Dave'


And, check out the result!

    get 'wiki', 'Page1'
    COLUMN                             CELL
     revision:author                   timestamp=1568169525393, value=Dave M
     revision:commit                   timestamp=1568169528613, value=First edit from Dave
     text:                             timestamp=1568169522777, value=This is page 1a!
    3 row(s) in 0.0160 seconds

**Question** What is the problem here?

Well, since we performed the operation in three separate commands, we have
different time stamps, this is not ideal.  Well, the goods news is that we have
been programming in ruby the entire time (via jruby).  Let's take advantage of
that and build up a little program.

Use your text editor to open a file `home/put_multiple_columns.rb` and add the
following code (I will talk though this in class).

    include Java
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.HTable'
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.Put'
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.HBaseConfiguration'


    def jbytes(*args)
      args.map {|arg| arg.to_s.to_java_bytes}
    end

    table = HTable.new(HBaseConfiguration.create, "wiki")

    p = Put.new(*jbytes("Home"))

    p.add(*jbytes("text", "", "This is page 1b!"))
    p.add(*jbytes("revision", "author", "Dave M"))
    p.add(*jbytes("revision", "commit", "Second edit from Dave"))

    table.put(p)

And run the command

    ./bin/hbase-shell /mnt/put_multiple_columns.rb

## Cleanup

Hop back over to the shell

    ./bin/hbase-shell

To get rid of the table, just take it offline and drop it

    disable 'wiki'
    drop 'wiki'

## Importing data (7DB - Hbase - Day 2)

In this section we will import and XML stream Hbase. An example of XML:

    <page>
      <title>Anarchism</title>
      <id>12</id>
      <revision>
        <id>408067712</id>
        <timestamp>2011-01-15T19:28:25Z</timestamp>
        <contributor>
          <username>RepublicanJacobite</username>
    <id>5223685</id>
    </contributor>
    <comment>Undid revision 408057615 by [[Special:Contributions...</comment> <text xml:space="preserve">{{Redirect|Anarchist|the fictional character|
    ... [[bat-smg:Anarkėzmos]]
        </text>
      </revision>
    </page>

In general, a basic xml parser has the following form:

    import 'javax.xml.stream.XMLStreamConstants'

    factory = javax.xml.stream.XMLInputFactory.newInstance
    reader = factory.createXMLStreamReader(java.lang.System.in)

    while reader.has_next
      type = reader.next

        if type == XMLStreamConstants::START_ELEMENT
            tag = reader.local_name
            # do something with tag
        elsif type == XMLStreamConstants::CHARACTERS
            text = reader.text
            # do something with text
        elsif type == XMLStreamConstants::END_ELEMENT
            # same as START_ELEMENT
        end
    end

Using the above "bones" of a parser, we can build out a tool that imports data
from wikipedia.  You can store the file in `home/import_from_wikipedia.rb`

	include Java

	require 'time'

	import 'javax.xml.stream.XMLStreamConstants'
	import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.HTable'
	import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.Put'


	def jbytes(*args)
	  args.map { |arg| arg.to_s.to_java_bytes }
	end



	factory = javax.xml.stream.XMLInputFactory.newInstance
	reader = factory.createXMLStreamReader(java.lang.System.in)

	document = nil
	buffer = nil
	count = 0

	table = HTable.new(@hbase.configuration, 'wiki')
	table.setAutoFlush(false)

	while reader.has_next
	  case reader.next
	  when XMLStreamConstants::START_ELEMENT
		case reader.local_name
		when 'page' then document = {}
		when /title|timestamp|username|comment|text/ then buffer = []
		end
	  when XMLStreamConstants::CHARACTERS
		buffer << reader.text unless buffer.nil?
	  when XMLStreamConstants::END_ELEMENT
		case reader.local_name
		when /title|timestamp|username|comment|text/
		  document[reader.local_name] = buffer.join
		when 'revision'
		  key = document['title'].to_java_bytes
		  ts = (Time.parse document['timestamp']).to_i

		  p = Put.new(key, ts)
		  p.add(*jbytes("text", "", document['text']))
		  p.add(*jbytes("revision", "author", document['username']))
		  p.add(*jbytes("revision", "comment", document['comment']))
		  table.put(p)

		  count += 1
		  table.flushCommits() if count % 10 == 0
		  if count % 500 == 0
			puts "#{count} records inserted (#{document['title']})"
		  end
		end
	  end
	end

	table.flushCommits()
	exit

Things to note:

- We are building up content in a hash called `document` and at some point we
  will write that document to the database.
- Observe the usage of the `flush`.  In general, HBash flushes data to disk
  periodically.  In this script we disable auto-flushing and control when we
  flush to disk.

Before running, lets add some compression.  Start the hbase shell and alter the
table (as we did before) to enable compression.  (We will use gzip, but in
general, using LZO is probably a better bet, however, LZO is a bit more
challenging to set up.)  We will also enable bloom filters.  We will study these
in depth later in the semester, but for now, it is enough to think of it as a
*probabilistic data* structure that helps solve element existence in a set.
If the query element is in the set, it will always be correct, but it may
sometimes tell you an element is in the set, even if it is not.

    hbase> alter 'wiki', {NAME=>'text', COMPRESSION=>'GZ', BLOOMFILTER=>'ROW'}


Depending on how you got here, you may have removed the table. If you did, no
worries, just create it again with the compression and a bloom filter:

    hbase> create 'wiki', {NAME=>'text', COMPRESSION=>'GZ', BLOOMFILTER=>'ROW'}, { NAME => 'revision', VERSIONS => org.apache.hadoop.hbase.HConstants::ALL_VERSIONS }

Now, lets run the script.  You will need to run hbase-base

    $ curl https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/latest/enwiki-latest-pages-articles.xml.bz2 | \
        bzcat | \ 
        hbase shell /mnt/import_from_wikipedia.rb

And if all works out, data should be downloading.  Now, lets poke around in
HBase's file system!  Let's start a bash shell in the container

   $ ./bin/hbase-bash

Check out the contents of `hbase-1.2.6/conf/hbase-site.xml`, we want to find out
where the hbase underlying hbase files live

    <configuration>
      <property>
        <name>hbase.rootdir</name>
        <value>file:///home/testuser/hbase</value>
      </property>
      <property>
        <name>hbase.zookeeper.property.dataDir</name>
        <value>/home/testuser/zookeeper</value>
      </property>
    </configuration>

We find this info by looking up `hbase.rootdir` and find it is
`/home/testuser/hbase`.  Let's go check it out

    $ cd /home/testuser/hbase/

**In class discussion  and things to check out**
- `du -h` on the content of `/data/default` as we scrape data.  Observe the file
  file structure and how it relates to our tables.  Observe how the folder names
  change as we load data.  Folder names relate to *region server*
- check out the folders in the root with "WAL" in their names, there are the
  files for storing the Write Ahead Logs.  *Check if learners know about
  journaling, if not, future lecture topic.*
- run `scan 'hbase:meta', { COLUMNS -> ['info:server', 'info:regioninfo'] }` and
  observe how the output, key names, and ENCODE values and timestamp values
  relate to the data in `data/hbase/namespace`

## Extracting graph

Next, lets extract a graph from the data we have collected so far.  Stop the
script from running with Ctrl-C.  Hope over to hbase-shell and create a links
table

    hbase> create 'links', {
    NAME => 'to', VERSIONS => 1, BLOOMFILTER => 'ROWCOL'
    },{
      NAME => 'from', VERSIONS => 1, BLOOMFILTER => 'ROWCOL'
    }

And create a scanner to extract links

    include Java

    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.HTable'
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.Put'
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client.Scan'
    import 'org.apache.hadoop.hbase.util.Bytes'

    def jbytes(*args)
      return args.map { |arg| arg.to_s.to_java_bytes }
    end

    wiki_table = HTable.new(@hbase.configuration, 'wiki')
    links_table = HTable.new(@hbase.configuration, 'links')
    links_table.setAutoFlush(false)

    scanner = wiki_table.getScanner(Scan.new)

    linkpattern = /\[\[([^\[\]\|\:\#][^\[\]\|:]*)(?:\|([^\[\]\|]+))?\]\]/
    count = 0

    while (result = scanner.next())
      title = Bytes.toString(result.getRow())
      text = Bytes.toString(result.getValue(*jbytes('text', '')))
      if text
        put_to = nil
        text.scan(linkpattern) do |target, label|
          unless put_to
            put_to = Put.new(*jbytes(title))
            put_to.setWriteToWAL( false )
          end

          target.strip!
          target.capitalize!

          label = '' unless label
          label.strip!

          put_to.add(*jbytes("to", target, label))
          put_from = Put.new(*jbytes(target))
          put_from.add(*jbytes("from", title, label))
          put_from.setWriteToWAL(false)
          links_table.put(put_from)
        end
        links_table.put(put_to) if put_to
        links_table.flushCommits()
      end

      count += 1
      puts "#{count} pages processed (#{title})" if count % 500 == 0
    end

    links_table.flushCommits()
    exit

Now we can run the script

    $ ./bin/hbase-shell /mnt/generate_wiki_links.rb

And we can start looking around

    hbase> scan 'links', STARTROW => "Admiral Ackbar", ENDROW => "Admiral of"
    hbase> get 'links', 'Addition'
    hbase> count 'wiki'

Play around, check out the hbase docs for more and enjoy!  You are now ready to
use hbase to do some data crunching on the assignment!

